bhavantamayamudvahan yadukulodvaho nissaran
dadarśa gaganoccalajjalabharāṃ kalindātmajām |
aho salilasañcaya: sa punaraindrajālodito
jalaugha iva tatkṣaṇāt prapadameyatāmāyayau ||1||
bhavantam-ayam-udvahan	Thee he carrying
yadukula-udvaha:	this leader of the Yadu clan
nissaran dadarśa	and setting out saw
gagana-uccalat-jala-bharām	reaching to the skies the water overflowing
kalinda-ātmajām	Kalinda's daughter, Yamuna
aho salila-sañcaya: sa:	Lo! water collection that
puna:-aindrajāla-udita:	as though caused by Indrajaala, magic
jalaugha:- iva	a flood like
tat-kṣaṇāt	in that very moment
prapada-meyatām-āyayau	to the ankles measuring became
When the leader of the Yadu clan Vasudeva set out carrying Thee, he saw the waters of the Yamuna river flooded to the skies. Lo! As he crossed, the waters were reduced to the ankles of his feet as if the huge expanse of water was an illusory flood caused by magic.
prasuptapaśupālikāṃ nibhṛtamārudadbālikā-
mapāvṛtakavāṭikāṃ paśupavāṭikāmāviśan |
bhavantamayamarpayan prasavatalpake tatpadā-
dvahan kapaṭakanyakāṃ svapuramāgato vegata: ||2||
prasupta-paśupālikāṃ	fast asleep, (in which) the cowherd women were
nibhṛtam-ārudad-bālikām-	gently (where) was crying a girl child
apāvṛta-kavāṭikām	open were whose doors
paśupa-vāṭikām-āviśan	(that) cowherd's house entering
bhavantam-ayam-arpayan	Thee, he (that Vasudeva) placing
prasava-talpake	on the labour cot
tat-padāt-vahan	(and) from that place taking
kapaṭa-kanyakām	the seeming female infant
svapuram-āgata: vegata:	came back to his city quickly
Vasudeva entered the cowherd chieftain's house, whose doors were open and the cowherd women were all fast asleep, and a baby girl was crying. He gently placed Thee on the labour cot and took the seeming female infant (Yoga Maayaa) in his hands and quickly proceeded to his house, in Mathura.
tatastvadanujāravakṣapitanidravegadravad-
bhaṭotkaraniveditaprasavavārtayaivārtimān |
vimuktacikurotkarastvaritamāpatan bhojarā-
ḍatuṣṭa iva dṛṣṭavān bhaginikākare kanyakām ||3||
tata:-tvat-anujā-rava-	then by Thy younger sister's the sound (of crying)
kṣapita-nidra-vega-dravat-	awakened and running fast
bhaṭa-utkara-nivedita-	the host of attendants informed
prasava-vārtayā-	(about) the delivery news
eva-ārtimān	(by which) only agitated
vimukta-cikura-utkara:-	(and with) dishevelled locks of hair
tvaritam-āpatan	hastily reaching
bhoja-rāja-atuṣṭa	Bhojaraaja (Kansa) dissatisfied
iva dṛṣṭavān	as if saw
bhaginikā-kare kanyakām	in his sister's hands the baby girl
Then awakened by the sound of crying of Thy younger sister, the host of attendants ran fast to inform Kansa of the child's birth. Stricken with fear, Kansa, with dishevelled hair, hastily reached the spot and was surprised and confused to see a baby girl in his sister's arms.
dhruvaṃ kapaṭaśālino madhuharasya māyā bhave-
dasāviti kiśorikāṃ bhaginikākarāliṅgitām |
dvipo nalinikāntarādiva mṛṇālikāmākṣipa-
nnayaṃ tvadanujāmajāmupalapaṭṭake piṣṭavān ||4||
dhruvam kapaṭaśālina:	certainly of the deceitful
madhuharasya māyā bhavet-	Vishnu's trick this must be
asau-iti kiśorikām	this (girl) thus (deciding), the girl
bhaginikā-kara-āliṅgitām	in his sister in her arms held close
dvipa: nalini-kāntarāt-iva	(like) an elephant from the lotus pond
mṛṇālikām-ākṣipan-	a tender lotus stalk plucking out
ayam tvat-anujām-ajām-	this (Kansa), Thy younger sister , the birth less one
upala-paṭṭake piṣṭavān	on a block of stone dashed
Kansa decided that certainly this was a trick of the deceitful Vishnu that this girl was born. He pulled the infant away from his sister who had held her close in her arms, just as an elephant would pluck out a tender lotus stalk from a pond of lotus, and dashed her, Thy younger sister, the birth less one, on a block of stone.
tata: bhavadupāsako jhaṭiti mṛtyupāśādiva
pramucya tarasaiva sā samadhirūḍharūpāntarā |
adhastalamajagmuṣī vikasadaṣṭabāhusphura-
nmahāyudhamaho gatā kila vihāyasā didyute ||5||
tata: bhavat-upāsaka:	then (as) Thy devotee
jhaṭiti mṛtyupāśāt-iva	quickly from the clutches of death, like that
pramucya tarasā-eva	slipping out (of Kansa's clutches) immediately
sā samadhirūḍha-rūpāntarā	she (Yoga Maayaa) assumed another form
adha:-talam-ajagmuṣī	below the earth not going (rising above the earth)
vikasat-aṣṭa-bāhu:-	(the form in which) she developed eight arms
sphuran-mahā-āyudham-	shining with divine weapons
aho gatā kila	what a wonder went away indeed
vihāyasā didyute	in the sky shining
Then, just as Thy devotee would quickly free himself from the clutches of death, she, Yoga Maayaa freed herself from the clutches of Kamsa immediately. Not hitting the earth, she rose above the earth in the sky and assumed another form with eight arms shining with divine weapons.
nṛśaṃsatara kaṃsa te kimu mayā viniṣpiṣṭayā
babhūva bhavadantaka: kvacana cintyatāṃ te hitam |
iti tvadanujā vibho khalamudīrya taṃ jagmuṣī
marudgaṇapaṇāyitā bhuvi ca mandirāṇyeyuṣī ||6||
nṛśaṃsatara kaṃsa	O cruel Kansa!
te kimu	what is your (gain)
mayā viniṣpiṣṭayā	by my killing
babhūva bhavat-antaka:	has been (born) your destroyer
kvacana	elsewhere
cintyatāṃ te hitam	think of your welfare
iti tvat-anujā	thus Thy sister
vibho khalam-udīrya taṃ	O Lord! to the wicked one saying
jagmuṣī marudgaṇa-paṇāyitā	went away (disappeared), being praised by the Devas
bhuvi ca mandirāṇi-eyuṣī	and on the earth, in the temples, entered
"O cruel most Kansa! What is your gain by smashing me? Your destroyer has been born elsewhere. Think of your welfare." Thus saying to the wicked one, Thy sister disappeared. The Devas praised her also as she entered the temples on the earth and was worshipped.
prage punaragātmajāvacanamīritā bhūbhujā
pralambabakapūtanāpramukhadānavā mānina: |
bhavannidhanakāmyayā jagati babhramurnirbhayā:
kumārakavimārakā: kimiva duṣkaraṃ niṣkṛpai: ||7||
prage puna:-	the next morning, again
agātmajā-	by the daughter of the mountain (Paarvati-Yoga Maayaa)
vacanam-īritā	the words spoken (which were)
bhūbhujā	by the king (being told to)
pralamba-baka-pūtanā-	Pralamba, Baka, Pootanaa,
pramukha-dānavā:	the main demons
mānina:	haughty
bhavat-nidhana-kāmyayā	with the desire to kill Thee
jagati babhramu:-nirbhayā:	all over the land, roamed about fearlessly
kumāraka-vimārakā:	killing children
kimiva duṣkaraṃ niṣkṛpai:	what is not possible by the merciless people
Thereafter, the next morning, the king told the main haughty demons, Pralamba, Baka and Pootana, what the daughter of the mountain, Paarvati-Yoga Maayaa had said. They then roamed all over the land fearlessly killing the children. Merciless people are capable of doing merciless deeds.
tata: paśupamandire tvayi mukunda nandapriyā-
prasūtiśayaneśaye rudati kiñcidañcatpade |
vibudhya vanitājanaistanayasambhave ghoṣite
mudā kimu vadāmyaho sakalamākulaṃ gokulam ||8||
tata: paśupa-mandire	then in the cowherd's (Nanda's) house
tvayi mukunda	(when) Thou were O Lord! (Bestower of Liberation)
nanda priyā-prasūti-śayane-	on wife of Nanda (Yashoda's) labour-bed
śaye rudati	lying and crying
kiñcit-añcat-pade	and slightly kicking the legs
vibudhya vanitā-janai:-	waking up, by the women folk
tanaya-sambhave ghoṣite	the birth of a boy was announced
mudā kimu vadāmi-aho	overjoyed, O What can I say
sakalam-ākulaṃ gokulaṃ	all brimming (with joy), Gokula was
Then, Bestower of Liberation! O Lord! Lying on the labour bed of Yashoda, the cowherd chieftain's wife, Thou raised infant cries as Thou slightly kicked Thy legs. All the women folk were aroused from sleep, and they announced the birth of a boy. O! How can I describe the joy with which the whole of Gokula was brimming.
aho khalu yaśodayā navakalāyacetoharaṃ
bhavantamalamantike prathamamāpibantyā dṛśā |
puna: stanabharaṃ nijaṃ sapadi pāyayantyā mudā
manoharatanuspṛśā jagati puṇyavanto jitā: ||9||
aho khalu yaśodayā	what a wonder indeed, by Yashoda
nava-kalāya-cetoharaṃ	like a fresh Kalaya flower enchanting the mind
bhavantam-alam-antike	Thee, very near to herself
prathamam-āpibantyā	at first drinking thoroughly
dṛśā puna:	with the eyes, then
stanabharaṃ nijaṃ sapadi	her own breasts immediately
pāyayantyā mudā	feeding joyfully
manohara-tanu-spṛśā	(Thy) charming body caressing
jagati puṇyavanta:	in the world, the most meritorious ones
jitā:	were surpassed
What a wonder indeed that the most meritorious and holy persons were surpassed by Yashoda by her good fortune as she imbibed with her eyes Thy beautiful form fresh as a Kalaya flower lying by her side. Then she joyfully applied Thee to her breasts feeding Thee, as she also caressed Thy charming body again and again.
bhavatkuśalakāmyayā sa khalu nandagopastadā
pramodabharasaṅkulo dvijakulāya kinnādadāt |
tathaiva paśupālakā: kimu na maṅgalaṃ tenire
jagattritayamaṅgala tvamiha pāhi māmāmayāt ||10||
bhavat-kuśala-kāmyayā	Thy wellbeing desiring
sa khalu nandagopa:-tadā	that, Nanadagopa indeed, then
pramoda-bhara-saṅkula:	with extreme joy overwhelmed
dvija-kulāya	to the Braahmin clan (holy men)
kim-na-adadāt	what did not give
tathā-eva paśu-pālakā:	in the same way the cowherds
kimu na maṅgalaṃ tenire	what auspicious act did not perform
jagat-tritaya-maṅgala tvam-	O Lord! The beneficiary of the world! Thou
iha pāhi mām-āmayāt	here save me from ailments
Nandagopa, overwhelmed with joy,and out of the desire for Thy wellbeing gave away limitless gifts to holy men of the Braahmin clan. In the same manner innumerable auspicious rites and observances were performed by the gopas for Thy sake. Thou the harbinger of auspiciousness of the three worlds, deign to save me from my ailments.